it is time now for our visit with dr.
Michael Parenti a political economist
and in my opinion an opinion of many
opinions of many others one of the
foremost political intellect on the
scene this evening good evening dr.
Parenti can you hear me
yes all righty you are live in front of
the K fjc audience okay can you hear me
all right you're coming in loud and
clear and on behalf of this audience I
want to thank you for taking time out
for your busy schedule to visit with us
this evening
I know ever thank you have many fans in
our audience I thought uh actually I
think we're gonna make a somewhat
different starting point I think dr.
Parenti than what I'd uh planned and
even what I just discussed with you next
week from 4:00 to midnight on the
station I'm gonna be doing something
which has become an annual tradition
here at KF JCAR become a tradition every
Memorial Day I do extensive programming
about the connections between US
industry and finance and the fascist
powers of Europe unfortunately history
war perhaps miss history has recorded
all the rise of fascism as an aberration
a little man with a pencil toothbrush
mustache hypnotized all the Germans and
made them all go crazy and then Along
Came the Allies and knocked off the bad
old fascists and everybody lived happily
ever after or they would have but along
came another bad name named another bad
man named Joseph Stalin who hypnotized
all the Russians and made them all go
crazy etc Oh what sir what relevance do
you see in the study of fascism perhaps
as a political economist well I get them
I see fascism is something very closely
linked to the crises in capitalism I
think you by the way done some very good
programs on this and you're absolutely
right that that especially much of the
literature after the 1940s well into the
50s 60s 70s has emphasized fascism as an
irrational movement much of the
television treat treatment also just
shows these guys goose-stepping and Sieg
Heil you know and it was all that there
was a cult themes there were scenes of
blood purity and and all that sort of
stuff but fascism had a very rational
side by rational I mean it served the
interests of some very real people it's
not only who supported it it was not
only that big business supported fascism
it's who
who the Nazis supported when they came
into power only who supported them but
whom they supported and they when you
had the crisis of capitalism fascism is
a an attempt at a final solution to the
class struggle they destroyed the trade
unions they destroyed all the left
political parties and even the centrist
and moderate moderately progressive
parliamentary groups they destroyed any
kind of political democracy they cut the
inheritance taxes for the rich they cut
wages drastically by a half and this is
true also in Italy as well as Germany
the profits increased tremendously and
the German cartels actually even became
complicit in the worst crimes the heart
did they looked the other way and give
Hitler support and running under the
table but it reached the point where you
had some major industries in Germany
using slave labor from the concentration
camps I mean working people to death and
so the profits were immense I mean when
you no longer have to pay workers of
three marks an hour or something and you
can you get them free you know just for
a little pin bowl of gruel at the end of
the day even had people like Krupp
energy begging the calling or Farben IG
Farben mm-hmm week making special
requests that new labor camps be built
near their other factory outlets so that
they'd have ready access to cheap labor
so this is the way I see fascism it is
ultimately in the service of capitalism
and much of US intervention throughout
the third world is the same thing I mean
under the guise of fighting communism
they say they're fighting communism is
saving democracy when they're really
helping fascism to save capitalism well
if we could step back in time there are
a number of takeoff points in your
remarks dr. Parenti the ones you've just
made that perhaps service all the as a
thesis statements for long pads of
wrinkle but if we could step back in
time now and one of the thing
that I wanted to pursue from your
comment was your reference to a crisis
in capitalism of course the Second World
War and the liquidations of all of the
people that resulted from would were to
part and parcel to that conflict those
events followed on the Great Depression
and the Great Depression was of course a
worldwide phenomenon I read into your
comments perhaps correctly perhaps
incorrectly that when you talk about the
crisis of capitalism that with regard to
the rise of fascism in the second prior
to and during the Second World War that
was the crisis you were referring to
more specifically how generally yeah
yeah how would you how would you equate
or how would you relate the rise of
fascism with the Great Depression well
or or would you or am i incorrect well
it was a number of things it was it was
the crisis of German and Italian
capitalism visa Viva English in French
and other Western European competitors
it was the falling rate of profit they
were enduring is he
one thing mostly need in Italy and
Hitler did in Germany was they said
there was a crisis and there was a
threat and they named communism the less
you know so these these people are
threatening us because they go but the
left was really never that powerful in
either of those countries to actually
see state power but there was a crises
it wasn't from the Bolsheviks and the
Communists or the Jews or this group of
that group it was from within the system
itself it had these enormous
contradictions a falling rate of profit
consumption going down especially heavy
industry was in crisis looking for new
exports imports all sorts of protections
and and what what what people on left
and what what the the Jews became more a
convenient era irrelevant for convenient
enemy on which to blame he seems the
Germans knew they were getting ripped
off by the cartels but if they moved
against German capitalism they will be
moving in a genuinely revolutionary
direction and instead they were told
well you know it's it's these other
people's to trade unionists who are
doing it if the Communists trade
unionists if it's the Masons
the precise allies who put this terrible
treaty on us it's this group that group
and behind all of them there's the Jew
you know and the way they fashioned if
you look at Nazi propaganda it wasn't
all that irrational
you know Hermann Goering made a very
good point he said if lunes if we are
lunatics then lunacy becomes us and that
there's the the old thing that you know
they may have been crazy but they
weren't stupid their propaganda to the
farmers stressed the users rates that
they had to pay and they said the Jews
were behind that their propagandist the
workers they said oh it's the rich
Jewish bankers behind you their
propaganda to the small business people
was it's the big Jewish department store
owners and there and all those people
and so they add their propaganda to the
middle class was that it was the Jewish
trade union guys who were getting all
his money for the for the union workers
and you're getting squeezed in the
middle so they they very much honed
their there they're appealed to conjure
up these irrelevant enemies and to
direct hostility attention that way just
as a George Bush running a Willie Horton
ad and hitting on affirmative action and
on quota systems and that sort of thing
is trying to direct people's very real
grievances I mean people have very real
grievances about system including Bubba
and Joe redneck and Archie Bunker they
have very routing they are they too are
getting ripped off and all and to direct
those things at the blacks the Jews the
the welfare chiselers the so we have a
lot of those same kinds of themes and
techniques operating here we have a kind
of non system without the swastika Huey
Long was right he said if fascism ever
came to America it will come under the
name of Americanism super patriotism No
one of the things that struck me as you
were analyzing the the macroeconomic
forces behind the rise of fascism the
first time around one of the things that
struck me was the similarity with some
of the things that are going on today
really but let's start economically many
of the things that you spoke about the
falling profits for example many of the
same
conditions are afflicting American
industry and beyond that are on awful
lot of the Western industrial capacity
even in the Asian nations as well
cutting the income taxes on the big
corporations cutting inheritance taxes
for the rich I mean Reagan was doing
these same things that Mussolini and
Hitler did really
indeed a program that this is I believe
one that was sent to you by I'm breaking
the labor unions doing the same thing
right I compared I did a comparison in
one of the programs I'm gonna be airing
next week Uncle Sam addy Luce American
support from Mussolini in the mythology
of the corporate state and which I
compared Muslims in many of them many of
the key features of Mussolini's
corporate state with the American
political economy under Reagan and Bush
political and economic situation oh well
that would be worth the price of that
tape I can tell you that's an important
analysis thank you but it is
unfortunately and I don't want you to
kill your own thunder but you want to go
into it now be my guest
all righty well we're gonna be going
into that at greater length what I
wanted to ask since my listeners get a
chance to to listen to me hold for us at
Great Lengths and I usually failed it to
say I usually don't disappoint in that
regard of what do you think well I wrote
perhaps shouldn't ask you to look into a
crystal ball but given some of the
similarities with the crisis in
capitalism that produced or led to the
rise of fascism last time around do you
feel that that is a realistic concern
today and and where do you see things
going both with regard to the crisis in
capitalism itself and with regard to the
solutions hopefully not a final solution
but the solutions that will be found to
that by the powers that be well what I
predicted over a year ago is that we
were witnessing the third world is a
ssin of the United States and I just
came across a quote by up by a CEO from
big corporation I don't have it handy
right now but he said that until we can
get labor costs down to what it is in
places like Brazil and South Korea don't
expect to be sharing in the benefits of
increased productivity I mean that's
saying it that's Brazil South Korea Wow
they really have plans and when they
talk about going global a global economy
they mean that that that the
poor workers in the third world who are
made to compete you know for pittance
for starvation wages or now will be an
open competition with American workers
and what we're seeing is all the good
the quality blue-collar jobs have been
pretty much wiped out with the possible
exception being defense I mean defense
is probably when the last place is where
you can still get a really good paying
blue-collar jobs which is why the impact
is being felt so well and there's an
awful lot of coverage on TVs of showing
defense workers out and now can we do
this in a lab and I kept saying to
myself gee they didn't put those daycare
workers in those Hospital the public
hospitals to close down those health
workers and the librarians and the
libraries they're closing and dosing
much sympathy for them but any case what
you're getting is this kind of
third-world ization a increase in in
underemployment upwards of over I think
it's over a third of the US workforce
now the ones who have jobs are working
as what are called casuals or temps or
adjuncts or Daly's you know which is
contracted workers who have no benefits
will work from day to day it's like one
big waterfront shape up you know you
don't know if you're going in or not and
so generally don't even get 40 hours a
week and so so you're getting a labor
unions have been broken and and and the
like so I would say there they may be
able to keep the political democratic
political framework intact but they
they're certainly changing the class
structure so that the working class is
really being depressed more heavily very
much again doing that they'll do it in
different countries in different ways in
some countries their bust the labor
unions with death squads they're go in
and shoot them you know we
systematically and repeatedly shoot the
the labor leaders noise like places like
El Salvador and such in this country
they're busted low begins with the
taft-hartley law with with impasse
organizing strictures with the court
injunctions and those kinds of things so
it's done somewhat differently the
methods may be a little more benign but
the whole goal is to is to really make
sure that any larger and larger portion
of the gross national income goes to the
top one two percent of the population
which is exactly what's been happening
there maybe depression and there may be
losses in wages and earning power for
millions of people but the very top
people are richer than ever they making
more and more money than ever so that's
that's my crystal ball it's not so much
that our political rights will be
threatened but our political rights
become increasingly irrelevant I mean
what the hell is the use that I could
talk about this or that or folks for
Georgie or Billy I mean if these guys
are going to be sticking it to us anyway
so so this is the kind of the thing
we're facing on the other hand we have
to mobilize we have to do some things I
think but I think Clinton is not Bush
it's not quite the same although he's
certainly close enough and then on some
for instance we are now right now
mobilizing to get changes in the
existing labor laws so that one could
organize a shop by going in and just
having sign up check cards you know it's
the way you can do it in Canada or place
like Sweden and in Sweden you got eighty
percent of the population there in labor
unions and it actually does help their
standard of living so these are some of
the kind of things we'd be doing within
an attempt to fight back Oh
dr. Parenti going back again to the
crisis in capitalism and where you see
what I would like to know is where you
see that crisis going and what sort of
response do you see to do your forecast
on the part of our national security
establishment bearing in mind the to
large extent our national security
establishment serves as a policy
instruments of America's corporate needs
not exclusively so but to a considerable
extent you were discussing that
executives observations on the third
world is Asian so to speak early and in
opposition to your own observations in
the third world
of America and you talked about Brazil
and South Korea of the states of civil
liberties in both of those countries is
rather sorry and I do not think that
most Americans would willingly go along
with the sorts of social conditions that
exist in those countries where do you
see the crisis in capitalism going do
you think that it is going to be
resolved successfully and if not where
do you see the conflict between American
democratic values and the needs of the
corporations to solve that crisis well
there's a basic contradiction between
capitalism and democracy I know we're
being given fed a lot of PAP now that
cap free enterprise and mmm and
political freedom are are compatible
twins or they're both necessary
conditions for each other but in fact
there are very basic contradictions the
essence of capitalism is to reward
people for market accumulation for
competitiveness for for really getting
what they can and to punish or to leave
to the droves
those who cannot run that race the
essences cap of democracy is that every
human being has a worse even even those
who maybe cannot perform so successfully
and and that there should be an
egalitarian rather than an unequal I
mean which of the essences with
capitalism is inequality so that strain
will be there if the people successfully
use democratic means to mobilize to
protect their standard of living or win
new games and cut into capitalist profit
margins and in a way deepening the
crises in a certain direction this this
then often leads to an extension of the
attack no longer do you just attack
their standard of living but you also
attack their democratic rights and the
by the way the Reagan administration was
fully aware that they were doing all
that sort of thing trying to limit the
legality of everything from limiting the
legality of demonstrations and shopping
malls to to trying to set up anti-terror
laws
for those who did solidarity work for
you know for Central America and and and
all those kind of all those kinds of
repressive measures in which they did
not succeed in all them but they
certainly limiting the access of the
Freedom of Information Act and the like
resolving the questions the crises of
capitalism successfully is a kind of a
ambiguous term because successfully for
whom you know I mean with the road there
going now is for them a great success
story their successful resolution is to
have the American worker competing in
utter misery with the Brazilian or South
Korean workers to have the the political
democracy very limited or marginal or
just the forms of it without too much of
the substance and they're squeezing and
squeezing more to maintain them their
profit margins it's a basically
irrational system and this is why people
who say Marx is no longer relevant I
have obviously never read mark because
March first of all never talked about
existing socialism in places like
Eastern Europe or Russia and he had
nothing to say about those things his
study was of the laws of capital motion
and development and his great work is
called capital capital and they've also
talked about imperialism and and what's
happening with capital is that an
increasing portion of every investment
goes into constant capital into the
technology the plans the means of
production and such and much much less
goes into the variable capital into the
labor the rate of exploitation goes
higher because you're hiring less
workers who are producing more and more
so finally what you got to do you it
what it comes down to is you investing
proportionately more and more capital to
get the same or less return so the make
up for that squeeze is you do you
squeeze the only thing that's really
flexible there which is the variable
capital which is the money you pay out
in wages the workers you squeeze them
and you make them take cutbacks and
benefits you make them take cutbacks and
wages and you do all the other things I
talked about earlier put them on temps
and make them into temporary workers
people don't have real jobs anymore
amazing the means of people who don't
you force them to take two jobs you you
give them force over time but without
time-and-a-half and any number of kinds
of things that you do and that's the way
they're quote resolving the crises and
the other thing is as you defeat
democratic forces throughout the third
world you leave those countries in a
client state relationship to the United
States which means that the US
multinationals or Japanese or French or
German or whatever can go into these
countries there are no labor unions that
are you know have any kind of strengths
at all
there's no occupational safety laws or
no environmental protection laws or come
on in here take what you want invest
what you want you know and no taxes you
have to worry you'll have to worry about
any taxes for twenty years if ever and
child labor or all just all the things
that we thought we'd left behind some
generations back the earlier part of
this century have are there in the third
world maybe never left a gotten had
gotten worse as investments gone in
there the condition of people being
driven off the land where there was
subsistence farming where they could
raise rice and beans for themselves and
that land has turned into cash crop
exports for coffee and sugar or um you
know cattle from so beef and that's by
the way no break for us we hear that
well when they go to cheap markets they
produce cheap commodities and and we get
a break on it if consumers so well
that's not true you know let's take the
case of Nike Nike has closed every
single factory they ever had in America
they they open their factories abroad
they now have their major the major
production is in a country called
Indonesia where they pay women 80 cents
a day I mean they pay them starvation
wages even the right-wing fascist
Indonesian generals have complained that
maybe this is a little too low half of
the right I read somewhere that
something like 70% of the women in the
Nike work force indonesia suffers from
some degree of malnutrition the shoes
they produce they bring back stateside
and they sell them for
125 120 hundred and thirty dollars a
pair so it doesn't give us a break and
anyway I don't want a break if it's
going to be all blood and slave labor
but they don't go all the way over there
to give you a nicer price on the shoes
they go all the way over there to cut
down their labor costs any penny they
have to pay out in wages is one less
penny they're going to get in pocket in
profits or in big executive salaries or
in big benefits or stock options or
private airplanes or all the other perks
that they have it's interesting that
many of the Nike shoes are altered the
marketing campaigns a Matt o black in
the Latino inner-city youth to the
body's large if to be like my quote
unquote mmm-hmm the irony is further
that the situation I should say has made
it even more grotesque because of the
marketing by the way for the benefit of
listeners that believe hopefully they
will all tune in next week one of the
things I'm gonna be discussing and in
fact analyzing in detail next week that
I have not had a chance to get to or I
have not gotten to in previous years is
Hitler Hitler's speech before the
industry Club of Dusseldorf in 1931 in
which he stated that democracy itself
was inherently subversive he equated it
with communism that's that that is
something that I'm gonna be going into
next week to make a very very long story
very short what Hitler said was and of
course his audience was the industry
club of Dusseldorf a bunch of industrial
high rollers who were only too receptive
to this message but it was a quote what
could perhaps almost be viewed as a
quasi Calvinist approach he said to the
assembled industrialists that democracy
itself was inherently subversive because
you meaning the industrialists enjoy our
superior position in society because you
are superior individuals you have more
ability and that's why who have risen to
the state you have risen to that's why I
call it quasi Calvinist in a sense he
then went on to say but if you allow
people democracy they were the elect
yeah exactly if you allow people
democracy they will use that democracy
to effect a redistribution of wealth and
that that would be unhealthy for society
because it is because it is counter
evolutionary not counter revolutionary
but counter evolutionary and that
therefore it's bad and
then went on to equate and in so many
words democracy with a communism and
that's it was that speech which
convinced most of the industrialists and
financiers of Germany to back Hitler and
the Nazi Party rather than some of the
other reactionary parties of Germany
that is the point I'll be going into
next week and so many American academics
today do the opposite they they say
nothing about the politically come
economy of Nazism
they say nothing about Hitler's appeals
to the big German capitalists and they
they just look at certain forms while
the Nazis had big praise the Communists
had big parades they both had
authoritarian states and they were
anathema now today is not sysm and
communism just two totalitarian twins
and that's simply both of which
victimized capitalism is simply not true
that not certain men and the example to
give her the dusseldorf of talks is a
good one
am I not correct that David that it was
at that 1931 meeting that they decided
to really start giving him funds in a
big way weren't they looking him over to
see and he was very charming and
reassuring and and and it was then he
got that enormous amount of money and
from 31 to 33 the Nazis were able to
wage mass campaigns and their votes went
up dramatically as he said we had cars
and loudspeakers and radio programs in
reach every Township in Germany and it
was exciting we had tremendous amounts
of funds I thought I thought and a lot
of that came from those guys wasn't it
that from that meeting or they won't
like it
earlier it was from that meeting was a
critical event in the rise of German
fascism and it's one which has great
relevance for a contemporary political
audience although not a Marxist myself I
have focused on many of the same things
that you have been speaking about it as
I attempt to bring to a moie modern
audience an awareness on historical
awareness of what fascism is why it is
that in 1993 I'm talking about events
that on Memorial Day of course which
commemorates
well America's dead in Foreign Wars the
largest of which was world war ii in
which many american finance ears and
industrialists back to the fascist
powers of Europe in fact they tried to
stage a coup in 1934
here to overthrow Franklin Roosevelt you
know something to explain which most
Americans don't even know about that was
when they tried to persuade General
Smedley Butler of the US Marines to come
in and move on it exactly yeah I have
the I have the congressional hearing
report on that and the McCormack
Dickstein committee yes the McCormack
Dixon here and and it was it itself was
censored there are a few things from it
that Larry Vivek Lawrence to provide the
journalist at the time wrote down made
him and which never got into the final
report and they implicated JP Morgan and
a number of other people and McCormick's
argument was well we had no proof of
that and that I got a laugh at that if
if in the congressional committee
reports you only put in that's the way
you had absolute proof you have a lot
less a lot less freedom for the
Government Printing Office I would say
but but in this case they was they were
suddenly getting they they got very
nervous and wouldn't so you have these
guys could actually pull something like
this
mm-hmm and go unpunished and unmentioned
in the report even though Butler himself
fingered the wrong at Morgan interests
as being behind the one who made the
overture they were pretty stupid to
approach him because he was a very
honest very popular they're very much
for the men in the ranks in fact that's
why they picked him because he was so
popular among the Marines and among
armed groups and they thought he could
lead him in and their their view was to
leave Roosevelt in and Butler would come
along and really wield the real power
because of the crisis situation and
they'd be like a cooperative government
got a hunter and the president the same
time limit it was that they picked the
wrong man however he blew the whistle on
them mmm and we what's one of the the 34
coup attempt and the McCormick Dickstein
committee and Smedley Butler and also
General Douglas MacArthur himself the
son-in-law of a key Morgan aide named
Edward stoats burry the original first
choice to lead the coup are gonna be
among the focal points of that part of
next week's discussion it's interesting
dr. Parenti too
look back in history and see that
whitewashed congressional report perhaps
as many of us feel frustration about
things like the iran-contra
investigation which is so badly
curtailed it is certainly not something
that's new
no it isn't the function of of these
kinds of investigations are - they're -
it's really not quite to whitewash it's
to I think you'll agree with this it's
to give the impression that the system
is self-cleansing and self-correcting
oh there's a scandal there's a problem
here we'll look into it in the course of
doing that they do come up with some
names and some people and some of the
stuff surfaces but at the same time the
other half of their task is to not go
too far and dig too much of the muck and
so there is there is a process of
uncovering some things and covering up
other things and it's going on
simultaneously and I find that kind of
fascinating of course the EMA media is
right there obligingly doing it along
with him for instance I think the
greatest single act of cover-up in
iran-contra affair I said it at the time
- was the failure of the committee to
call Vice President George Bush before
them you know I mean if he was up to it
in the fears I had a very special very
special ring an operation he was doing
so we had the practice of uncovering but
and yet cover-up at the same time would
that be a fair thing to say I think so
the Germans have a term called the Haram
lotion which means rendering harmless
and it will certain extent those
investigations do that if something
troublesome comes along whether it's our
government dealing directly with
terrorists and importing cocaine and
forming contingency plans to set up
martial law round up some tens of
thousands perhaps even millions of
people all these features of the
iran-contra investigation it is
necessary I would would maintain I've
had listen you wouldn't I suspect agree
that you have you can't allow the
American people to be left with that
impression of American society that you
have to point out that well although
there are people who want to do things
like that eventually just as one sees in
the movies and in fantasy entertainment
the good guys come in with a white hats
and mount up
bad guys and if they don't kill him they
made they certainly put him in prison
and everything everything and everybody
lives happily ever after yeah the
American people are certainly I guess
discouraging the degree to which some of
my compatriots can be taken anytime but
polls over the last twenty years do show
a remarkable decline in people's
accepting of existing institutions you
know that they like what institutions
you put your faith in or which you trust
and all that and the trust levels for
the military the federal government in
general the Congress the media the
business leaders the religious leaders
the trust levels for all of them have
gone down rather dramatically the
problem that people don't really quite
see you know what the alternative is you
know my investigation shows that a lot
of what's called political apathy is
really just political cynicism and
discouragement that people are not it's
really antipathy that turns into apathy
and and because people just get
disgusted and turned off and this system
does not turn out math numbers of
conservative activists you don't have
mass numbers of conservatives marching
in the streets and saying more more tax
cuts for the rich you know get rid of
Social Security and there's that and
everything what it does turn out great
numbers is a political a political
people a pathetical people hypothetic
people cynical people why don't he was
really genuinely apolitical mean I mean
they're just distracted by the puffery
and the distractions of them of the
consumer culture and mass TV and all
that stuff which by the way I don't
think is really a political I shouldn't
say that I remove I wrote a book while
ago called make-believe media the
politics of entertainment where that
where I argued that many of our
so-called entertainment films that
you're being much more than just
entertaining ones and they're filled
with imageries of know
tourism and authoritarian power and and
and racist and sexist things in olya and
anti working-class things all through
them but but there are people just
genuinely totally uninformed a
historical would be the other thing
which is why I think your your tapes
also so valuable and as you were just
saying people the usual word is that
people are bored by history you know
just a lot of dates as men if when you
make history relevant relevant to them
when they suddenly realize that what
you're talking about from 40 50 200
years ago is that our dynamics which are
which are obtaining to this day right
now they realize that what they are
experienced on not just the
peculiarities of this or that
personality or some epiphenomena limb
but that there are these larger forces
going on and they want to a larger and
repeatable forces and they then they
suddenly get very interested in want to
know more about them which is why indeed
the study of fascism is is very relevant
to the study of tyranny in any society
is relevant because we always face that
danger today oh the media and the role
of the media is actually something that
directly inspired the work that I'm
doing here I determined a significant
gap between what could be determined
from the responsible historical record
and the average of the awareness of the
average American and so undertook to
establish in a sense my own outlet for
information to do what I personally can
to correct that one of the individuals
upon whose work I relied for much of the
historical record of fascism an
individual whose work I will feature
next week and an individual who's also
done a lot of writing on the role of the
media the printed or spelled even it
precisely and his works for us such as
the Lords of the press you can't print
that tell the truth and run he is in
many ways I have I view as the The
Godfather or the progenitor of Amarra
modern American investigative journalism
and he's done a lot of work on in
addition to fascism itself how the media
themselves fit into the larger picture
of the corporate state both abroad and
in the United States indeed in my
discussion of Mussolini's corporate
state I relied heavily on not only on
George Selby's but on his accounts of
how the American
covered up for American Finance who
sipar instrumental in supporting
Mussolini and how despite the fact that
Mussolini's corporate state was a dismal
failure it was portrayed in the American
media as a marvelous success mm-hmm how
do you see the media to a certain extent
I've already answered this question but
a media concentration media ownership
and political reaction in this country I
think are are inextricably linked but
wonder if you could comment on that and
where do you see that relationship going
in the future
well if again it's not quite a lap dog
and it's not and it's certainly not the
watchdog of democracy that they pretend
to be it's kind of like a frisky house
pet that will occasionally nip at the
leaders heels again wag its tail and
what you know is really nothing nothing
for real and other times it's a
downright raging cheering section the
media are the Iraq war saw them as Shira
tearing section for the military
military should have been to pay them
for the job they did it's very good this
media is very clever at giving the
impression of false alternatives and the
one thing that happens with people in in
countries where the press is
state-controlled and censored if they
know it that they controlled and
censored and no no they knew that in
Russia alone there was no question of
merit but a lot of people do think we
have a free and independent media in
this country because you know they'll
see something on the air and everyone
guy talking for the policy another one
talking against it but always be within
a very limited framework and no one ever
raising trends of the kinds of questions
that we do this kind of discussion can
be heard on very relatively small media
and radio and circle we could never be
addressing audiences of 10 or 15 million
on a major network and discuss this kind
of thing this way I mean I've been on
major Network TV shows but it's so
structured is that you have three
conservative screaming at you where hey
you know from different directions and
you get out you're lucky if you get out
a few sentences
and then if you do try to get into
something that's so totally out of
context that it sounds completely at
odds with anything that the program is
considering to be true or not so the
media as I've said before are not close
to corporate America and they're not
friendly to corporate America they are
corporate America they're an integral
part of it I mean NBC is owned by
General Electric Jim you can go on I
mean CBS is a big international
multinational corporation and and the
like and their role continues to be that
of of representing the interest I think
that's such a compatibility
compatibility between them and
government is because both the media
elites and the government a leads
represent the same class interests and
so they they operate pretty much
together on anything it's interesting
and to me grotesque to hear the constant
right-wing harping about the liberal
news media I mean if a news media are
liberal I've missed something somewhere
along the line yeah I agree
and of course with a very far-right the
news media might still be a little bit
too liberal ish for them they would like
them to be you know really even farther
over
I mean cage made the media to maintain
his legitimacy does report I know this
scandal or that iran-contra is something
wrong here or a toxic waste dump or an
oil spill or the unemployment figures
have gone up but you know you think and
if the far-right had their way none of
that stuff would be reported and their
idea of a of a good media is one that
you had constant celebrations of the
wonders of the free enterprise system
and anti-communist horror stories and
you know and then and then a lot of
puffery and by the way a lot of stations
and a lot of newspapers fit that
description to hmm so any kind of odd
that they would talk about the liberal
bias in the media when in fact if you're
a conservative commentator like a Rush
Limbaugh or or Evans and Novak a William
Buckley John McGrath Maps three
television shows on the air William
Buckley has one and there's also
every other night on something else I
mean almost all your pundits and
commentators are either far right-wing
or moderately conservative or centrist
there's really nobody that's genuinely
progressive and generally critical or
left in the media so to call it a
liberal media is really not true it's
really a right to centrist media access
yeah I'm reminded of read Irvin of
accuracy in media whose organization
would be more appropriately termed in
accuracy and media an individual who has
very strong links to the former world
anti-communist League also not
incidentally an individual who a little
over six years ago tried to drive me off
the air yeah yeah I was attacked by all
read about six years ago he wanted me
off the airwaves obviously he was
unsuccessful in his efforts I was on a
panel with Reed Irvine out at an new a
conference of Newsday a Newsday you know
the newspaper out in New York City and
Long Island right and he got up and
talked about how the liberal media you
know and and the left to me and I
couldn't believe it
and then I said and how a piece of his
opinions weren't being but I said I said
read how many don't you have a little a
newspaper column how many newspapers
carry it isn't it about 50 and so he
said no it's it's 110 is Odalys well you
know the best we was strengthening my
argument I said don't you have a radio
show that there goes to about I figured
if the members now 70 and he said no
it's 80 stations carry my radio show or
something like that 80 100 you know
those numbers I said well how exactly
how many people with a working-class
perspective with a left perspective an
anti-capitalist perspective how many
people can make that claim that they've
got those kind of outlets even a
relatively moderate consumer advocate
and critic like Ralph Nader his column
is carried only in about 20 little
newspapers you know and some of them
with those little weekly giveaway things
and and this is a guy who's we've had a
national name a bigger name in reader
fine and the reason is because these
space
these newspapers are all owned but most
of them are owned by rich conservatives
and they don't tolerate a different
perspective so you know you know this is
this is the way this is related the
truth of matter is that reality is left
is that his reality is about it's when
people say that a Marxist perspective I
said well I you know I don't really know
what Mark really had to say about
America in the late 20th century I think
he was well dead and buried over 100
years by then but but it's not a Marxist
I don't think I don't consider when I
say that that labor unions are being
destroyed that we used to have 30% of my
works rather 40% of the workforce in
unions and today we have barely 17
percent and that labor is suffering a
greater and greater disadvantage and
people hurting I don't know can survive
a march of the perspective I consider
that reality I mean that's what's
happening out there
mm-hmm indeed the forces of
multinational corporate capitalism are
inseparable from the rise of fascism
that's what as I said before it's one of
the major themes and one of the
underlying research areas of my of my
work on the air Oh dr. Parenti what I
had something on this sure you see the
coziness of that same thing happening in
terms of the favoritism shown toward the
Croatian fascist today in in in Europe
that is the dogs of war are running
crazy in the media and that we've got to
go in and and stop the terrible carnage
by the way there is chilling going on
all three sides against each other in
there I mean I'm quoting Warren
Christopher even he said all three sides
have been killing each other an atrocity
I think some of the worst atrocities
have been committed by the Croatians
they now have a republic which has the
esashi flag and it's a Nazi flag and one
needs to have their leader President
Tudjman
is a guy who's written stuff about about
the desirability of cleaning Europe
cleaning the Jews out of Europe and and
done stuff like this
he was invited by this government to
appear at the commemoration of the
Holocaust Museum in Washington just last
month I thought that was a sick joke
I couldn't even believe that he was
there of course he's showing a better
face these days but but none of this
gets reported and what we get are these
horror stories in the media about
genocide they're throwing water like
another Holocaust and genocide I mean
that's crazy I mean as as the Secretary
General of the UN Boutros boutros-ghali
made the point he said there was more
killing in one day in Luanda in Angola
by the Jonas Savimbi my CIA must not
even call him all that but I'm
identifying them the units are people
right the only top people that was
telling in Luanda in one day than in the
entire siege of Sarajevo as the
secretary-general of the UN Boutros
boutros-ghali made the point he said
there was more killing in one day in
Luanda in Angola by the Jonas Savimbi
Merson CIA mercenaries he didn't call
them all that but I'm identifying them
the units are people right the only top
people that more chilling in Luanda in
one day than in the entire siege of
Sarajevo and just today's San Francisco
Examiner I invite your listeners to look
at it there's a item there box items on
the page it says the Bosnian Serbs are
have launched the most intense attack on
sorry AVO in many months the most
intense attack intense fighting and then
if you read two lines out it says nine
lives were lost and 100 wounded I mean I
don't want to see one life loss and I
don't want to make light of that but the
media hype is so crazy I mean that's
hardly a major war Holocaust I mean why
are you throwing terms like that around
trying to hype up people to go in where
US policy has been to break up
Yugoslavia into a lot of little small
right-wing republics that'll be just
little European versions of banana
republics that could be used any way we
want and the Serbs have been resisting
that the Bosnian Muslim Croatians broke
Bosnia broke away from some
from the yugoslavia and now the Bosnian
Serbs want to break away from Bosnia I
mean it's like when Virginia seceded
from the Union then West Virginia
seceded from Virginia again I'm not
making heroes out of the Serbs they have
been doing some dirty things themselves
I mean then no here was a man but I I do
not see and I wish people on the Left
would get would would really understand
that a government that gave us El
Salvador government that backs the
Indonesian fascist and East Timor a
government like ours that had better
they were able to destroy a country like
Iraq to do all these things that that
national security state is not going to
go into Europe just repealing
humanitarian reasons if we go in without
firepower and all that will kill more
people in a week then then that war has
killed any year it's also worth noting
that the u.s. national security
establishment has incorporated and
actively supported the residual of the
Croatian fascists in the posto to world
war ii period of the Gailen spy
organization originally Hitler's Eastern
Front spy organization during World War
two
jumped to the CIA became a de facto NATO
intelligence organization and ultimately
wound up as the Bundestag big nadine's
to BND the West German now German
intelligence service which it is to this
day first name right Reinhard Reinhard
Galen I'm telling you that organization
has been one of the major focal points
of my research going all the way back
about 20 years ago when I came across
many of the Galen alumni operating at
the or serving at the operational level
of President Kennedy's assassination the
Oswald's to make a very long story very
short were handled certainly in the
Dallas Fort Worth area and probably in
the former Soviet Union as well by
members White Russians in Eastern
European fascists associated with the
Galen organization and the Croatian
fascists found succor with the Galen
group and in turn with the CIA and with
the closely-related anti-bolshevik bloc
of Nations originally put together by
adolphe Hitler in 1943 later evolving
into a major element of the world
anti-communist League so that as as the
mall and the family very much so Maria
and there will be linked to each other
quick yeah it in it's it's grotesque to
me to see the absence
a discussion of this not only in the
American media as a whole but as you
have noted in the progressive media as
well the absence of awareness of the
role of the Croatian and Montenegrins
secession Zorn action no actually was
not a Slovenian secessions in
precipitating the crisis and the direct
role played by the US and Germany has
thus far almost completely escaped
notice including apparently in the
progressive media as well with with very
few exceptions very few exceptions most
of them will not touch these
conspiracies they think conspiracy is a
hokey subject and they're very mistaken
conspiracies are the other instrument
used by the national security state to
carry out its functions of maintaining
that kind of power and concentration of
wealth they use legitimating functions
propaganda media lies all sorts of
things they'll run candidates and
elections they'll also kill and and plan
and plot and conspire and to think they
wouldn't do it is is really the strange
view as a regime to think there aren't
conspiracies in the face of Watergate in
the face of iran-contra in the face of
the SNL scandal which the Justice
Department itself called a thousand
conspiracies of theft bribery and fraud
a thousand conspiracies their
conspiracies all the time and our
leaders conspire they've lie to think
otherwise is to think that they don't
pursue their own interests but they
always tell the truth that they got
nothing to hide they themselves so they
are planning to hide they call it
national security they call it top
secret you know
covert action they admit every day that
they say they don't want this to get out
that I want that to get out we've had to
had a freedom we've had to have a
Freedom of Information Act to get little
scraps and bits out of them and then for
people to turn around and say there are
no conspiracies there aren't how they
aren't hiding anything what you see is
what you're getting what you're getting
is is all there is is really rather
naive and apparently there are some
people even in alternative media who who
don't seem to have much of an
alternative perspective on that David
you're a much younger man than I am and
I'm getting a bit tired so maybe you'll
let me go now okay
I don't really enjoyed this alrighty I
was wondering if I could ring one more
Western out of you though okay alright
because you've already touched directly
on this one of the major points that I
have made over the years is that there
is a continuity between US national
security operations abroad and at home
you have already discussed your view
with which I subscribe to of the third
world ization to coin a phrase of
America well where do you see national
security policy inside of the country
going in light of that's third world
ization
well I think that continual repressive
measures six surveillance red squads and
the local police the local police forces
of various cities I mean I know I'm
under surveillance I get my picture when
I was in Washington get my picture taken
by plainclothes guy right though I do
not believe was FBI I believe he's with
the Washington DC police red squad my
phone gets tapped these kinds of things
go on all the time so they're they're
still doing all of that stuff there's
still plenty of the McCarthyism people
with any kinds of of left affiliations
outspokenly or high visibility or le can
get really can get any kind of access to
to you know strategic institutional jobs
and I mean even the civilian section
forget government or military and media
and such so they do surveillance of
labor union organizers these are all
American Peace organizes people who are
fighting for environmental rights are
called eco-terrorists and maybe they
come under surveillance and people who
all people are fighting for decent
things are treated like criminals and
all the criminals are treated like the
great leaders of society and thanks to
people like you and we'll we'll we'll
keep our own listenership alerted to
those kinds of things
so what we got to do is not mourn but
organize organize educate agitate and
fight back I thank you laughing all
righty before you leave dr. Parenti I
wonder if you could perhaps give out the
address phone are not addressed but the
post office box phone number etc and
tell interested listeners where they
could
learn more about your work and access
you work at both both tapes perhaps
lectures and some of your articles and
books well I can do that and I just
switched to a cordless phones right over
to to where I have that material I'm
glad you mentioned that I was about to
go madly fiddling around the board here
for they did the change in tones very
very dramatically yeah you could still
come across loud and clear but I noticed
suddenly you sounded different as well
Marin guys what we have which button do
it hit here okay hello is that okay that
was fun yeah people could get you can
get a flyer a brochure which lists all
my tapes it'll be sent to you free from
people's video and people's video is p
o-- box nine nine five one four that's
nine nine five one for seattle
washington the zip code is nine eight
one nine nine a lot of nines out here in
the west bank nine eight one nine nine
yeah or easier you could always call
people's video at two oh six seven eight
nine five three seven one and and they
will send you a flyer and you can up or
send you any tapes you want if you read
the lift tape to you okay now you have
offered many books and articles as well
what are some of the titles and the
publishers that the interest of the
listeners can pursue on that you've
authored ok well i just had a new book
out or what we're really not new but a
second edition is called inventing
reality the politics of news media which
goes into some of the things we were
talking about how the media distorts
both domestic political and u.s. foreign
policy line i have another book called
democracy for the fuel which is a
critical radical analysis of the whole
american democratic system and political
economy and i have another book called
the sword and the dollar which is about
imperialism and revolution in struggles
in the third world and US policy
relating to them and another call
make-believe media the politics
entertainment and I'll have a book
coming out in August called land of
idols which is about political mythology
in America I've just given you the last
six of seven that are still in print
we're coming into print all right well
that will give but interested listeners
plenty to chew on I'm sure okay I will
repeat the address phone number etc etc
for people's video later on in the
broadcast well thanks a lot all right
it's a pleasure dr. Parenti I would like
to also add that those tapes are also
like yours they are sold not for profit
I don't make any money in people's video
don't we sell them at cars I think they
cost only four dollars a tape okay very
good I'd like to invite you back at some
point in the future dr. Parenti when
your schedule permits I'd it being
particularly interested to pursue one of
the lines of debate that has occurred
within the progressive political
community in recent months that of a
quote institutional versus quote
conspiratorial analysis and in
particular you had I thought a very
intelligent exchange with Noam Chomsky
one of the foremost figures in the
progressive political community an
individual on bitterly critical of and
the whole subject of American political
assassinations and why it is not
politically correct to talk about those
which I personally see as almost a form
and not almost really a form of no
Holocaust theory it didn't really happen
and I'd like to take that up when we
have the time to do that in the future
okay we will okay well thank you and
that one but tape you're going to do let
me return the favor how do how does one
get hold of the one you're gonna do
Memorial Day on fascism all of all of
the archive shows that I've produced and
I've got that brochure I can need to
call them and you can call them and in
fact next week I'm going to be
rebroadcasting Uncle Sam on the swastika
originally done in May of 1980 with some
addenda that have been done recent
including one done last year talking
about George Bush's family and their
relationship to the same transatlantic
financial and industrial axis that
supported Hitler I'm going to be talking
about Uncle Sam and Dale Luce the tape
that you heard talking about American
support for Mussolini in the mythology
of America and
the corporate state we're going to be
talking about the 34 coup attempt next
week going to be talking about corporate
links between Japanese fascism and
America and also I'm going to be
analyzing in detail and actually reading
long extracts from Hitler speech to the
industry club of Dusseldorf in which he
basically said democracy is subversive
something we touched on earlier all
right very good all righty okay good
talking alrighty thanks so much talking
ready